A SUICIDE PREVENTION  
TOOLKIT

Safety plans to 
prevent suicide



IN THIS TOOLKIT

What is a safety plan?

When is a safety  
plan written?

Why does it work?

Suicide safety plan

How to co-develop  
a Safety Plan

How to implement  
a Safety Plan

Is a safety plan the  
same as a no-suicide 
contract?

References



While some people who consider suicide do so 
fleetingly or only once in their lives, others experience 
these thoughts ongoing or off and on over time. 
Suicidal thoughts can burden people and hold them 
hostage. Experiencing these thoughts is to experience 
“absolute darkness, hopelessness, pain,” and nothing 
matters but stopping that pain.  
As friends and caregivers, we may feel at a loss to help 
or support people with these thoughts; we may feel 
that taking our loved one to the emergency room is our 
only option, that crisis medical support is necessary. 

If the person at risk of suicide is in immediate crisis, 
the emergency room is an appropriate level of care. 
Otherwise, co-developing a safety plan is the best  
way forward.

This toolkit will show you what a safety plan is and 
how to create one together with an individual who 
may be at risk. It will illustrate how safety plans work 
and why they are one of the best tools to help mitigate 
future suicidal behaviours.

This toolkit is for people wishing to help someone they know who is 
struggling with thoughts of suicide. If you’re struggling with thoughts of 
suicide yourself, contact your local crisis centre for support.

A safety plan can also be used to support and guide a person who is self-
harming, however, in this toolkit we focus on people with thoughts of suicide.



What is a safety plan?

A safety plan is a document 
A suicidal crisis refers to “a suicide 

that supports and guides attempt or an incident in which 
someone when they are an emotionally distraught person 
experiencing thoughts seriously considers or plans to 

of suicide, to help them imminently attempt to take his or 
her own life” (Suicide Prevention 

avoid a state of intense Resource Center, n.d.).
suicidal crisis. 
Anyone in a trusting relationship with 
the person at risk can help draft the 
plan; they do not need to be a When is a  
professional. 

When developing the plan, the safety plan  
person experiencing thoughts of 
suicide identifies: written?
•• their personal warning signs, 
•• coping strategies that have worked 

for them in the past, and/or 
strategies they think may work in A safety plan is written when a person 

the future, is not experiencing intense suicidal 
thoughts. It may be written after a 

•• people who are sources of support in 
suicidal crisis, but not during, as at this 

their lives (friends, family, 
time an individual can become 

professionals, crisis supports),
overwhelmed with suicidal thoughts 

•• how means of suicide can be removed and confusion, and may not be able to 
from their environment, and think clearly. A safety plan is written 

•• their personal reasons for living, when a person has hope for life, or 
or what has helped them stay alive. even can consider the possibility of 



life, so that they can identify their resources are another integral safety 
reasons for living, and positive actions plan component. Drawing on strengths 
they can take to prevent their thoughts is the entry-level activity; reaching out 
from becoming intense and for help may also become necessary 
overwhelming. (Xie, 2013; Bergmans, personal 

A safety plan can be developed in communication, 2019).
one sitting by the person with thoughts The safety plan is organized in 
of suicide together with you, their stages. It starts with strategies 
caregiver or friend, or over time. The the individual can implement by 
plan can change as the circumstances themselves at home and ends with 24/7 
for the individual change, and can be emergency contact numbers that can 
revised accordingly. be used when there is imminent danger 

or crisis.
The person with thoughts of  

Why does  suicide can verify, along with their 
caregiver or friend, whether coping 

it work? skills are feasible, as well as whether 
or not the chosen contact people 
are appropriate. Alternative ideas 
can be brought forward by either 

A safety plan is an assets-based party as needed (Bergmans, personal 
approach designed to focus on a communication, 2019).
person’s strengths. Their unique When implemented, safety plans 
abilities are identified and emphasized become self-strengthening. For people 
so they can draw on them when their who experience recurring suicidal 
suicidal thoughts become intense. The thoughts or crises, one strength 
goal is to draw upon their strengths becomes knowing they have weathered 
during subsequent recovery and the storm before and have navigated 
healing processes (Xie, 2013). Personal their way out. 



Suicide safety plan
To download a pdf of the template, visit bit.ly/2lW4nAJ
To download an app with the template, visit apple.co/2m0OQjh

   STEP 1: WARNING SIGNS (THOUGHTS, IMAGES, MOOD, SITUATION, BEHAVIOUR) THAT A CRISIS MAY BE DEVELOPING:  

1.

2.

3.

   STEP 2: INTERNAL COPING STRATEGIES  – THINGS I CAN DO TO TAKE MY MIND OFF MY PROBLEMS WITHOUT CONTACTING ANOTHER PERSON 
   (RELAXATION TECHNIQUE, PHYSICAL ACTIVITY):  

1.

2.

3.

   STEP 3: PEOPLE AND SOCIAL SETTINGS THAT PROVIDE DISTRACTIONS:  

1.  NAME  PHONE

2.  NAME  PHONE

3.  PLACE  4.  PLACE

   STEP 4: PEOPLE WHOM I CAN ASK FOR HELP:  

1.  NAME  PHONE

2.  NAME  PHONE

3.  NAME  PHONE

   STEP 5: PROFESSIONALS OR AGENCIES I CAN CONTACT DURING A CRISIS:  

1.  CLINICIAN NAME PHONE

 EMERGENCY CONTACT PHONE 

2.  CLINICIAN NAME PHONE

 EMERGENCY CONTACT PHONE 

3.  LOCAL EMERGENCY SERVICE

 EMERGENCY SERVICE  ADDRESS

 EMERGENCY SERVICE  PHONE

4.  CRISIS SERVICES CANADA PHONE: 1-833-456-4566

   STEP 6: MAKING THE ENVIRONMENT SAFE:  

1.

2.

The one thing that is most important to me and worth living for is:

Safety Plan Template ©2011 Barbara Stanley and Gregory K. Brown, is reprinted with the express permission of the authors. No portion of the Safety Plan Template may 
be reproduced without their express, written permission. You can contact the authors at bhs2@columbia.edu or gregbrow@mail.med.upenn.edu. 



1 STEP ONE: List warning signs that 
indicate a suicidal crisis may 
be developing.

GUIDING QUESTION(S) FOR THE  WHEN TO IMPLEMENT?
PERSON THINKING ABOUT SUICIDE: At any time before a suicidal crisis. 
What (situations, thoughts, feelings, 

HOW TO IMPLEMENT?
body sensations, or behaviours) do you Being aware of one’s own warning 
experience that let you know you are signs can alert the person to the fact 
on your way to thinking  about suicide, that they may be at high risk of 
or that let you know you are mentally thinking about suicide when these 
unwell generally? Think about some of situations/thoughts/body sensations 
the more subtle cues.   arise. They can put the plan in action 
EXAMPLES: and move onto the next step: coping 
Situation: argument with a loved one strategies.
Thoughts: “I am so fed up with this and Being aware of personal warning 
I can’t handle it anymore” signs can help friends/caregivers 
Body sensations: Urge to drink alcohol identify when that person may need 
Behaviours: Watch violent movies, more support, even before they’ve 
irregular eating schedule asked for it.

(Stanley & Brown, 2012)



2 STEP TWO: List the coping strategies 
that can be used to divert thoughts, 
including suicidal thoughts. 

GUIDING QUESTION(S) FOR THE  WHEN TO IMPLEMENT?
PERSON THINKING ABOUT SUICIDE: At any time before a suicidal crisis, or 
What (distracting activity, relaxation when suicidal thoughts emerge but are 
or soothing technique, physical not intense. 
activity) helps take your mind away 

HOW TO IMPLEMENT?
from thought patterns that feel scary The person with thoughts of suicide 
or uncomfortable,  or thoughts can use these coping strategies to help 
of suicide? distract them from their thoughts  
EXAMPLES: and move them to a more positive 
Distracting activity: Watch a mental space.
 funny movie Friends/caregivers can suggest to 
Relaxation technique: the person that they use one or more 
Deliberate breathing of their coping strategies and support 
Physical activity: Go for a bike ride them if needed.  

3 STEP ONE: List the places and people 
that can be used as a distraction 
from thoughts of suicide.  

GUIDING QUESTION(S) FOR THE  WHEN TO IMPLEMENT?
PERSON THINKING ABOUT SUICIDE: At any time before a suicidal crisis, or 
Where can you go to feel grounded, when suicidal thoughts emerge but are 
where your mind can be led away from not intense. 
thoughts of suicide? Who helps take 

HOW TO IMPLEMENT?
your mind away from these thoughts? The person with thoughts of suicide 
EXAMPLES: can go to these places or contact these 
Places: Go to a movie, sit in a park people to help distract them from their 
People: Text friend (name, phone), go for thoughts of suicide and move them to 
coffee with a co-worker (name, phone) a more positive mental space.



4 STEP FOUR: List all the people that 
can be contacted in a crisis, along 
with their contact information.

GUIDING QUESTION(S) FOR THE  HOW TO IMPLEMENT?
PERSON THINKING ABOUT SUICIDE: The person with thoughts of suicide 
Who among your friends, family, and can call these people at any time, to 
service providers can you call when distract them from their thoughts or to 
you need help (when your thoughts let them know when their thoughts are 
become overwhelming or you’re becoming more intense, signaling that 
thinking about suicide)? they need support. 
EXAMPLES: Friends and caregivers can respond 
Mom: work phone, cell phone to the person by supporting them 
Spouse: work phone, cell phone through this difficult time: listening 

to them, going to visit them, making 
WHEN TO IMPLEMENT?

At any time before a suicidal crisis, sure to check in often, asking what 

or when suicidal thoughts emerge specifically they can do to help.

and are becoming intense. 

(Stanley & Brown, 2012)



5 STEP FIVE: List mental health providers 
and the hours they can be reached, 
as well as 24/7 emergency contact 
numbers that can be accessed in  
a crisis.

GUIDING QUESTION(S) FOR THE  WHEN TO IMPLEMENT?
PERSON THINKING ABOUT SUICIDE: When suicidal thoughts have become 
Who are the professionals you’ve very intense, and the person 
worked with who can be helpful to you experiencing the thoughts believes 
in a crisis? What other professionals or they cannot cope on their own.  
organizations could you call?

HOW TO IMPLEMENT?
EXAMPLES: The person with thoughts of suicide 
Therapist: work phone, cell phone,  should immediately call or visit these 
hours available crisis contacts.
Closest hospital: Regions Hospital,  
640 Jackson Street 
Crisis Line: 1-833-456-4566

(Stanley & Brown, 2012)



6 STEP SIX: List the steps to be taken  
to remove access to means of  
suicide from the environment. 

GUIDING QUESTION(S) FOR THE  HOW TO IMPLEMENT?
PERSON THINKING ABOUT SUICIDE: The person with thoughts of suicide 
What could be used to die by suicide in can remove these items from their 
your environment (home, work)? How environment themselves, giving them 
have you thought about dying by to friends or caregivers. The person 
suicide before, and how can you make working with them on their safety 
that method more difficult to access? plan should confirm that all means 
EXAMPLES: have been removed from the home.  
Pills: Give to pharmacist or friend  Friends/caregivers can offer to keep 
for disposal or throw away these items. Keeping a 
Guns (or rope): Remove from home  person safe from a method of suicide 
(give to a friend, etc.) can mean different things for each 

person and method. Firearms in 
WHEN TO IMPLEMENT?

Before a suicidal crisis, preferably particular should always be removed 

immediately after safety plan is from the home, regardless of whether 

developed.  or not they have been noted as a means 
of suicide.

(Stanley & Brown, 2012)



7 STEP SEVEN: List important reasons  
to live, or how/why that person  
is still alive. 

GUIDING QUESTION(S) FOR THE  WHEN TO IMPLEMENT?
PERSON THINKING ABOUT SUICIDE: At any time before or during a  
When do you feel most at ease during suicidal crisis. 
the day? Who do you love? What do 

HOW TO IMPLEMENT?
you enjoy doing? What did you used to A person with thoughts of suicide can 
enjoy doing? What is important to you, refer to these reasons for living at any 
or used to be important to you? What time, as often as they want, to remind 
has kept you alive up until now? them of the positive aspects of 
Note: These reasons can become their lives.
apparent through conversation with Friends/caregivers can use these 
the person, and through the process of reasons in organic conversation, to 
a suicide intervention. You may need to help gently remind that person of their 
identify these for the person, based on reasons for living.
what they’ve told you.

EXAMPLES:

My dog is important enough to me that 
I want to stay alive to take care of him.

(Stanley & Brown, 2012)



How to How to  
co-develop  implement  
a safety plan a safety plan
Co-developing a safety plan involves a Once complete, you and the person 
collaborative, in-depth conversation who has had thoughts of suicide should 
between the person experiencing keep copies of the safety plan in an 
thoughts of suicide and their caregiver accessible place. The safety plan needs 
or friend. to be handy so that the person can 

Go over each step together, always find it when they are 
thoroughly and thoughtfully (Berk experiencing intense thoughts of 
& Clarke, 2019). There may be times suicide. Some people choose to always 
where, through organic or structured keep their plan with them, e.g. on their 
conversation, you will identify phone or in their wallet. 
potential safety plan items for the Each step in the safety plan plays 
person - bring these into the plan! a role in supporting the person with 
For example, if someone mentions thoughts of suicide, as well as yourself, 
that they need to get home to spend and other friends and caregivers. Refer 
time with their dog, that is a potential to the “Suicide safety plan” for how and 
reason to live. You can suggest adding when to implement each step.
the positive things you hear coming Keep in mind that the safety plan is 
from that person at any point. not written in stone: it can be revised 

as often as is needed. The plan can be 
reviewed at any time, and especially 

“You talked about how excited your if the person experiencing thoughts 
dog is to see you when you get home of suicide has found any portion of 
earlier. Can you tell me a bit more it ineffective in helping them cope 
about him?” Then, “It sounds like he’s with their thoughts. For example, if 
really important to you. Do you think one contact person was found to be 
we could add him onto your safety difficult to get in touch with on several 
plan as a reason for living, or as a occasions, or if a coping strategy is no 
reason that you’re still alive?” longer effective or accessible. 



Is a safety plan the same as 
a no-suicide contract?

A no-suicide contract is different from Both service users and clinicians 
a safety plan in that it is “an agreement, have voiced strong opposition to their 
usually written, between a mental use. Moreover, important ethical 
health service user and clinician, and conceptual issues in the use of 
whereby the service user pledges not such contracts have been identified, 
to harm himself or herself ” (McMyler including the potential for coercion 
& Prymachuk, 2008, p.512). It was from the clinician for their own 
introduced in 1973 by Robert Drye, protection and the ethical implications 
Robert Goulding and Mary Goulding. of restricting a service user’s choices 
Mental health service users are when they may be already struggling 
expected to seek help when they feel for control. A strength-based approach 
they can no longer honour their like a safety plan, on the contrary, 
commitment to the contract (Rudd, not only encourages the service 
Mandrusiak & Joiner, 2006). user’s input and agency, it is a true 

The no-suicide contract has been partnership with the physician or 
widely used by clinicians working caregiver, bound by hope (McMyler  
with patients at risk of suicide (Rudd, & Prymachuk, 2008; Rudd, Mandrusiak 
Mandrusiak & Joiner, 2006). However, & Joiner, 2006).
there is a lack of evidence to support 
contracts as clinically effective tools. 



REFERENCES

Berk, M. & Clarke, S. (2019). Safety Stanley, B. & Brown, G. (2011).  
planning and risk management.  Safety plan. Retrieved from http://
In M. Berk (Ed.), Evidence-based suicidesafetyplan.com/uploads/
treatment approaches for suicidal SAFETY_PLAN_form_8.21.12.pdf
adolescents: Translating science into Stanley, B. & Brown, G. (2012). 
practice (63-84). Washington, D.C.: Safety planning intervention:  
American Psychiatric Association A brief intervention to mitigate 
Publishing. suicide risk. Cognitive and 
Drye, R., Gouling, R. & Goulding, M. Behavioral Practice, 19(2), 256-264.
(1973). No-suicide decisions: Suicide Prevention Resource 
Patient monitoring of suicidal risk. Center. (n.d.) Topics and terms. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, Retrieved from https://www.sprc.
130(2), 171-174. org/about-suicide/topics-terms 
McMyler, C. & Prymachuk, S. Xie, H. (2013). Strengths-based 
(2008). Do “no-suicide’ contacts approach for mental health 
work? Journal of Psychiatric and recovery. Iranian Journal of 
Mental Health Nursing, 15(6), Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, 
512-522. 7(2), 5-10. Retrieved from https://
Rudd, M., Mandriusiak, M. & www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
Joiner, T. (2006). The case against articles/PMC3939995
no-suicide contracts: the 
commitment to treatment 
statement as a practice alternative. 
Journal of Clinical Psychology. 
DOI:10.1002/jclp.20227



We are the Centre for 
Suicide Prevention, a branch 
of the Canadian Mental 
Health Association. For  
35+ years we have been 
equipping Canadians with 
knowledge and skills to 
respond to people at risk  
of suicide. 

We educate for life. 

Centre for Suicide Prevention suicideinfo.ca 
T 403 245 3900   @cspyyc 
csp@suicideinfo.ca